---
weight: 2
---


# Instructor perspective

This document addresses a number of concerns from the course instructor's point of view: how to run a course with one or multiple projects, what course
prerequisites need to be there, importance of institutional context and 
program specifics. It also addresses a number of important assumptions.

&nbsp;



# Options for multi-semester projects

One of the attributes of many external projects is they often can't be
completed in a single academic semester. Consequently, instructors must
decide the most suitable method for carrying forward the work, taking
into account the course structure of the institution and any specific
learning goals. Throughout the existence of the Studio, we have
experimented with various transition models, each showing success.
Below, we detail these approaches, outlining the benefits and potential
drawbacks observed with each:

## For institutions with only a single SPSG semester length course

For institutions that don't have multi-semester sequences suitable for
SPSG this approach may be the only fit.

### Continuation with different student team(s) same course

For this model each semester the new student team must become familiar
with the project and the partner's project leadership. This is the
steepest learning curve as without fore thought it can be like starting
a whole new project again. We have found a couple of approaches that
make this a much easier transition. First, with this type of model the
documentation and transition activities at the end of each semester
become all the more critical so being sure to emphasize that these
activities are just as important as development activities and having a
grade weighting appropriate to reflect this importance can be an
invaluable tool in students appreciating the documentation is more than
just a formality. The other aspects we have used successfully to assist
this transition is having the members of the previous team that are now
either more senior students or alumni continue to be a resource for the
new team, such as serving as near peer mentors on the projects or at a
minimum meet with the new student team at the start of the semester in a
kickoff event which serves as a crash course for the new student teams.

## For institutions with either year-long or course sequences suitable for SPSG

For institutions that have either a year-long course or similar course
sequence (e.g. Software Engineering I and Software Engineering 2, or
Software Engineering and Senior Project) there are a number of options
for supporting a multi-semester project.

### Continuation with same student team

With this approach in the subsequent semester the same student team
continues working with the same project in the following semester. This
approach has the obvious advantage of requiring minimal to no time
getting the team up to speed on the project and student's already have
built a relationship with the partner. As a result, this typically
allows for progress to immediately continue. The main challenge with
this approach is if not all students in the initial class continue it
can lead to either a smaller team in the subsequent semester or adding
one new member to an existing team that is already up to speed, which
may lead to poor experience for the new added student.

### Continuation splitting student teams

This approach has been used when the initial phase of the project was a
proof of concept of setting up a foundation for a larger multi-tasked
development effort in a subsequent semester. An approach that has been
used successfully for this has been to divide the original team in the
following semester among the number of teams that will be working on the
project in the new semester. With an even mix of new members and members
that are familiar with the project. We have found this to work well with
the continuing students becoming sources of expertise within the new
teams. This typically allows for shortening the partner and project
learning curve.

### Continuation with different teams

A third approach is to have the project continue on with the subsequent
course in the sequence, but with a different team. With this approach
there is still the need for strong transition documentation, but
students have sources of expertise in their classroom. While in may seem
less intuitive than keeping teams with their original project, we have
found this approach along with reshuffling teams in the subsequent
course to actually be our preferred approach from a learning
perspective. Specifically, we have found a number of benefits come from
this. It gives the students a direct opportunity to see what types of
gaps they may have had in preparing their first semester's transition
documents and thus learn through direct extended feedback learn what
types of assumptions to avoid in documenting software systems. We have
also found the switch in projects, project leadership, and student team
members to be a valuable learning experience of being exposed to how
tech stacks often differ across organizations and being able to
recognize these similarities and differences is a valuable skill in
itself. Finally, the change in projects often mean the students get
exposure to different project leadership styles, as does the change in
student team members require learning to be effective with different
team dynamics. When considered together, these are valuable learning
opportunities that benefit the students significantly.


&nbsp;


# Project maintenance concerns

To be continued...

{{< footer >}}
