---
weight: 1
---

# SPSG Structure Guide {#spsg-structure-guide .unnumbered}

## Overview

SPSG project structure is grounded in **agile practices** by focusing on
*short iterations*, *customer involvement*, and providing enough
*flexibility* to address changing requirements and other challenges.
Each project consists of four phases:

1.  Inception,

2.  Elaboration,

3.  Development, and

4.  Transition.

These four project phases are illustrated below, along with the corresponding project activities and deliverables.

{{< process_outline_image_map >}}

Phase durations reflect the scope of the underlying course, as shown
below. Here, SE refers to a typical Software Engineering course that
combines the theoretical foundation of a software engineering course
with a semester-long course project. Here we provide a sample schedule
for a typical SE course with the coverage of the material aligned to
facilitate the students having the background in time for each of the
assignments and deliverables. SP refers to Senior Project (or Senior
Design/Capstone) course whose content focuses primarily on the project,
along with assigned readings and discussions emphasizing professional
and ethical issues. A typical SPSG project lasts two or more semesters.
Each course typically includes teams working on a variety of projects
for different partners. After the first semester, students who worked on
a given project in the SE course, continue into the SP course. In those
programs where there is only one course that can host such a project
(SE), the project can continue in the next offering of the same course
with new team(s). This is discussed in detail in the [Instructor Perspective](<../instructor_perspective>) document. Depending on the project and on the
curriculum structure, the same students may or may not still be actively
working on the same SE project, however a key role is these students
remain accessible to answer questions and support the new SE teams in
their onboarding process. In this capacity, they engage with new SE
student teams, facilitating project continuity and transferring
knowledge.

![](/images/timeline.png) 


## Project Phases and Continuity

The **Inception** phase occurs before the semester starts and involves
the instructor working with the project partner to determine project
feasibility, student skill alignment, scope, duration, and expected
outcomes. This results in a standardized project proposal document
received by one or more student teams.

During **Elaboration**, students form teams and work closely with the
project partner to understand and formulate project requirements.
Alternatively, teams could also be formed by the instructor. For new
projects, teams go through several iterations of project partner
interviews to form outline requirements, which then are translated into
user stories forming the initial product backlog. For continuing
projects, remaining user stories are reviewed and adjusted taking into
account any new user stories reflecting the next set of requirements.
Teams work closely with the project partner to verify that the user
stories correctly reflect the desired functionality, while the project
partner sets user story priorities.

The **Development** phase is structured using the agile methodology.
Each *two-week sprint* starts with the team planning their work by
identifying which user stories will be moved from the product backlog
into the sprint backlog. Given that a student typically dedicates no
more than 10 hours per week to the project, instead of daily scrum
meetings, students participate in a *weekly scrum* during one of the
regularly scheduled class meetings. During a weekly scrum, each team
briefly discusses their progress made during the past week towards
meeting the *sprint goal*, as well as the plan for the upcoming week.
Throughout the sprint, teams maintain an open line of communication with
the project partner to make sure that any questions can be answered
promptly. At the end of the sprint, each team demonstrates their
progress to their project partner during a sprint review when the
project partner may accept or reject some or all of the newly developed
functionality. Each team also participates in an *in-class
self-reflection* during the sprint retrospectives when they can
*inspect* the results they accomplished, discuss the lessons learned
during the sprint, and *adapt* both the product backlog (to better
reflect any possible changes in the project requirements) and the team's
workflow (to make sure that the team does more of what works for them
and less of what doesn't).

Finally, the **Transition** phase takes place during the last week of
the semester. It focuses on knowledge transfer and typically includes
the final project demonstration to the project partner and the entire
class. There are several possibilities at this point: a) the project
continues next semester with the same team(s) (typical for teams in the
SE course that will be in the SP course next semester); b) the project
continues next semester with at least one new team (same scenario as
above, but with an additional team from the next semester's SE course;
or when there's no overlap in teams); or c) the project is completed and
there are no teams actively involved in feature development. These
scenarios are illustrated below.

![](/images/scheduling.png)

Regardless of the project state, to facilitate the knowledge transfer,
teams typically prepare a set of user and deployment documents for the
project partner and subsequent project teams. Project continuity is
enabled by several factors: a) *team staggering* so that there is an
overlap between a team continuing with the project and a new team, b)
extensive *knowledge transfer* documentation including configuration and
build documents, and c) *near-peer mentoring* where a recent graduate
who worked on the same project mentors the next team(s).


&nbsp;

&nbsp;


# SPSG project events and deliverables {#spsg-project-events-and-deliverables .unnumbered}

## Inception: Project negotiation and proposal

**Type: events + deliverable**

During the Inception phase, the instructor collaborates with the project
partner to prepare a project proposal. This needs to be a collaborative
effort because many potential partners may find it difficult to describe
the project scope or explain in clear terms what project outcomes they
are looking for.

Project negotiation is an iterative process. We ask all prospective
project partners to have a conversation during the initial meeting where
they can explain their project ideas and we can provide meaningful
examples of completed projects relevant to the partner\'s operational
domain and/or problems they are trying to solve. Such conversations
almost always start with a real-time dialog, but then often transition
to email, giving more time to provide additional information and answer
follow-up questions that are very likely to emerge on either end.
Furthermore, the instructor needs to collaborate with the project
partner to ensure that the potential project is a good fit using the
[SPSG Project Feasibility Assessment Model]{.underline}. Once the
instructor has determined that the project is a good fit, we ask the
project partner to take a first cut at completing some parts of the
project proposal, which is likely to lead to a more fruitful discussion
about the project feasibility and the appropriate project scope.

We recommend including the following elements into the project proposal:

-   Partner contact information

-   Background information about the partner

-   Project motivation

-   Project scope

-   Project challenges

-   Constraints and assumptions

-   Software/hardware/resources provided by the partner

-   Partner- and project-specific deliverables

-   Proprietary information

In our experience, well-rounded project proposals emerge after one or
more revisions to the initial draft.

**Template:** [SPSG project proposal template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG project proposal template.docx>)

**Prerequisites:** n/a

**Grading rubric:** n/a


&nbsp;



## Elaboration: Team agreement 

**Type: event + deliverable**

The team agreement, also referred to as a team information sheet, serves
several purposes. Requiring the team to create a collaborative agreement
prompts them to meet and discuss a range of important questions. This
can serve as a good icebreaker, hopefully paving the way for positive
team dynamics and rapport. This document will also serve as a "business
card" for the team, that can be shared with the project partner before
their first meeting with the team. Knowing this helps the team be
professional both in the content and in the presentation of the team
agreement document.

To help break the ice and get people to talk we suggest the team to have
a meal together. During the pandemic, we changed this recommendation to
holding an online meeting. Taking an informal picture during the meal or
a screenshot during the online meeting would help build the team's
identity and further demonstrate it to the project partner.

We suggest asking students to structure their team agreement by
including the following information:

-   Team introduction: a unique team name, a (formal) group picture of
    the entire team, and a paragraph describing the strengths of the
    team as a whole

-   Team member introductions: an individual picture and a brief
    biography of each team member written professionally as an
    introduction to a prospective employer

-   Contact information: for every team member, list their preferred
    emails, GitHub IDs, and other applicable contact information (e.g.
    telephone numbers); identify one team member who will serve as the
    main contact

The team needs to discuss every aspect of the team agreement in detail
and describe all decisions in the deliverable including (but not limited
to) the following:

-   Methods of communication

-   Communication response times

-   Meeting attendance

-   Version control

-   Division of work

-   Submitting deliverables

-   Contingency planning

We encourage the teams to add any other items that they believe may be
important.

**Template:** [SPSG team agreement template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG team agreement template.docx>)

**Prerequisites**

**Grading rubric**



&nbsp;



## Elaboration: Project kick-off

**Type: event**

As soon as the teams are formed, they are assigned to a specific
project. An introductory email sent by the instructor includes two
attachments, a project proposal and a team information sheet, to
introduce both parties to each other before they meet.

Following that, the project partner meets with their assigned team. We
recommend that the instructor attend at least some part of this meeting.
This is an opportunity for the team and the project partner to meet
face-to-face or online. In case of online meetings, we find it essential
to remind students to keep their cameras turned on, at least during the
project kick-off meeting. The objectives of this meeting include:

-   Review project objectives, deliverables, and potential challenges.

-   Identify a mutually convenient meeting time when the team (or at
    least most of its members) would be able to meet online with the
    project partner on a weekly basis. The project partner is again
    reminded that it is very important for the team to provide an update
    on the project progress and to discuss any concerns. Having a
    scheduled meeting occurring at the same time every week ensures the
    best project outcomes for both the team and the project partner.

-   Discuss communication policies: typical response timeframe and
    modality.

-   Discuss the project schedule with the teams. The project partner
    must be mindful of the students' course schedule and their
    respective deliverables, along with any scheduled tests, school
    holidays, etc. Thus, it is very important to share an up-to-date
    course syllabus with the project partner. Similarly, the team needs
    to be aware of the partner's schedule.

**Template:** [SPSG introductory email template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG introductory email template.docx>)

**Prerequisites:** SPSG team agreement

**Grading rubric:** n/a




&nbsp;




## Elaboration: Project proposal reflection

**Type: deliverable**

To facilitate bridging the gap between the partner's and the team's
understanding of the project goals and requirements, we ask the team to
write their own reflection of the project proposal. This is the
beginning of the team's requirements engineering process. The project
proposal reflection consists of three main parts:

-   Intended use of the system

-   Overall functionality

-   Main components

We encourage the team to share this document with their project partner
before submitting it to the instructor. It is very likely that the
partner can point out some discrepancies or omissions, thus helping the
team improve their understanding of the project and its scope.

**Template:** [SPSG project proposal reflection
template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG project proposal reflection template.docx>)

**Prerequisites:** a high-level introduction to software requirements
and requirements engineering

**Grading rubric**





&nbsp;




## Elaboration: Requirements outline

**Type: deliverable**

This deliverable serves as the next step in the requirements engineering
process. The team is asked to have follow-up interactions with their
project partner to ask follow-up questions and to verify the correctness
of their understanding of any information presented in this deliverable
focusing primarily on functional requirements.

Requirements outline deliverable consists of several components:

-   A narrative providing a general overview of the system\'s functional
    requirements and identifying several use cases.

-   A set of user stories in a commonly accepted standard, each user
    story corresponding to one of the use cases identified above.

-   A set of pre- and post-conditions for each user story.

-   A list of relevant nonfunctional requirements.

-   A glossary of relevant project-specific terms.

It is essential that the instructor provides an in-depth critique of
this deliverable. In addition to providing written feedback, we strongly
recommend having a conversation with each team to find out why they made
the decisions they made, to learn about their reasoning process in
identifying each use case, and their rationale for identifying any
epics. It is crucial to correct any potential mistakes at this point.
Not doing so will have a potentially strong detrimental impact on the
team's success in the project.

**Template:** [SPSG requirements outline template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG requirements outline template.docx>)

**Prerequisites:** use cases (including UML use case diagrams), agile
user stories, functional and non-functional requirements

**Grading rubric**




&nbsp;




## Elaboration: Product backlog

**Type: deliverable**

This deliverable is essentially a refinement of the previous
deliverable, outline requirements. The teams are asked to work with the
project partner to set priorities (e.g. high/medium/low or
must-have/should-have/could-have). We also ask the teams to estimate the
story point size of every item in the product backlog. Having a priority
and an estimated size for each user story would enable the teams to
identify a set of user stories planned for the first sprint.

The product backlog deliverable includes the following components:

-   A refined list of user stories with priorities, estimated size, pre-
    and post-conditions,

-   A sketch of user interface (as applicable).

**Template:** [SPSG product backlog template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG product backlog template.docx>)

**Note:** This template assumes that there will be four development
sprints in this project, which factors into the sprint size
calculations. This should be adjusted as needed.

**Prerequisites:** introduction to scrum, user story sizing and
prioritization

**Grading rubric**


&nbsp;



## Development: Development kick-off presentation

**Type: event**

Note: In a typical SE course where the development phase spans the
second half of the semester, this presentation can take place at
approximately the mid-point of the semester. Also, this presentation may
not be essential in a typical SP course where the development phase
spans almost the entire semester.

We found that it is very helpful to have an opportunity for each team to
share their experience in requirements engineering with the other teams
before they start their development sprints, especially if different
teams are working on different projects. In addition to strengthening
their communication and presentation skills, an opportunity to present
their progress so far also helps the team focus on what's most important
in their project. Furthermore, unlike weekly scrums and sprint
retrospectives that also take place in class, the mid-point presentation
is much less technical because it focuses on project requirements and
gives student teams an opportunity to reflect on their interaction with
the project partner. We ask each team to make a formal presentation
reflecting the following:

-   The project, its goals, its problem domain, project users and their
    needs,

-   Main functional and non-functional requirements of the project,

-   Highlights of the product backlog and sprint planning strategies,

-   Any lessons learned so far about interacting with the project
    partner, teamwork, and other non-technical aspects of the project.

**Template:** n/a

**Prerequisites:**

**Grading rubric**


&nbsp;



## Development: Sprint planning & backlog

**Type: event + deliverable**

At the beginning of every sprint, the teams are asked to review (and
possibly update) their product backlog and, taking into account the
priorities, pre- and post-conditions, and story point sizes of every
user story, select several user stories for the next sprint backlog. We
require the teams to use specialized project management software to
maintain their product and sprint backlogs. Our current recommendations
include:

-   [Trello](https://trello.com/) -- free and very easy to use,

-   [GitHub
    Projects](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/planning-and-tracking-with-projects)
    -- free to use professional-grade system, a part of the GitHub
    ecosystem.

Except for the first sprint backlog (submitted as a part of the [product
backlog deliverable](#elaboration-product-backlog)), each backlog is
submitted as a part of the [sprint report deliverable](#development-sprint-retrospective--report).


&nbsp;



## Development: Standup meeting / weekly scrum

**Type: event, every sprint**

A typical student participating in this project is usually a junior or a
senior who is expected to dedicate about 10-12 hours per week to the
project. They typically take a number of other demanding courses and may
have many other responsibilities. Therefore, the industrial practice of
daily scrums/stand-ups is hardly applicable in this context. We have
adopted a practice of *weekly scrums* when all team members discuss
their progress made during the past week towards meeting the sprint
goal, as well as the plan for the upcoming week. Depending on the
student load and scheduling, similar scrum meetings can be also held
more frequently, e.g. twice a week. We typically run weekly scrums in
class to strengthen accountability, provide more opportunity to practice
public speaking skills, and to keep the rest of the classmates
up-to-date about everyone's progress, which is especially useful if more
than one team is working on the same project. Additionally, holding
these scrums in class offers a unique advantage. It gives each team an
opportunity to observe and learn from the issues that may arise in other
projects, providing valuable insights. The instructor also shares
suggestions on how to address or mitigate such challenges. This exposure
helps teams better prepare for potential issues on their own projects,
fostering awareness and providing strategies they can apply when similar
challenges emerge.


&nbsp;



## Development: Sprint review

**Type: event, every sprint**

The team is required to meet with their project partner at the end of
every sprint to provide an interactive demo. The intent is for the
partner to have the ability to interact with the system, not just watch
how the team interacts with it. The partner should review the sprint
backlog and reflect the extent to which every feature (user story)
planned for this sprint has been implemented. The team reports about
this during their in-class sprint retrospective.


&nbsp;



## Development: Sprint retrospective & report

**Type: events + deliverable, every sprint**

Although based on the concept of a traditional scrum sprint
retrospective, this event incorporates a number of other elements. At
the conclusion of every sprint, each team is asked to conduct their
sprint retrospective in class, in front of their classmates. This is
done to promote accountability, provide more opportunities to practice
communication skills, and to allow everyone in class to learn from the
experience of every team. Compared to a traditional sprint
retrospective, this event is more like a summary of the actual
retrospective that the team had sometime earlier. This format also
requires strict timeboxing of this event to ensure that each team has at
least 15 minutes to present and answer questions. During the
retrospective, we ask each team to address the following:

-   What was accomplished and to what extent, what were individual team
    members' contributions?

-   What worked well for the team during this sprint?

-   What didn't work well and how did you address that?

-   What are the lessons learned?

Depending on the level and the nature of the course, the complexity of
the project, the maturity of students, and the number of teams, some
instructors may ask each team to provide the summary of the sprint
review along with a brief demo, as it was shown to the project partner.

Each team is asked to submit a sprint report that provides a summary of
the sprint retrospective and a sprint backlog for the next sprint.
Additionally, we ask the teams to plan their next sprint before they
submit this deliverable. This deliverable includes the following
components:

-   User stories completed during the sprint,

-   Changes to the product backlog going into the next sprint,

-   Lessons learned during this sprint,

-   Next sprint backlog.

**Template:** [SPSG sprint report template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG sprint report template.docx>)

**Note:** This template assumes that there will be four development
sprints in this project, which factors into the sprint size
calculations. This should be adjusted as needed.

**Prerequisites:**

**Grading rubric**


&nbsp;



## Development: Updated code repository

**Type: optional deliverable, every sprint**

If the instructor wants to emphasize the code management aspect of the
project, the end of every sprint could be an opportunity to examine the
team's or each individual teammate's levels of contribution to the
codebase.


&nbsp;



## Transition: Project demonstration

**Type: event**

A final demonstration is a vital element of any course project. Each
demonstration should be accompanied by a brief presentation explaining
the nature and the specifics of the project. In our practice, a project
demonstration replaces the last sprint retrospective. As a result, we
ask for the presentation to specifically discuss the lessons learned by
the team during the last sprint, as well as the main lessons learned
throughout the entire project.

**Template:** n/a

**Prerequisites:**

**Grading rubric:** \[Project demonstration grade will reflect the
quality and degree of project completion\]


&nbsp;



## Transition: User manual

**Type: deliverable**

This deliverable should be customized based on the specific needs and
expectations of the project partner. Generally, we ask the teams to
produce a deliverable reflecting the main features of the system and
providing several detailed walk-throughs through the system illustrating
how different tasks can be accomplished.

**Template:** [SPSG user manual template.docx](</files/templates/SPSG user manual template.docx>)

**Prerequisites:**

**Grading rubric:**


&nbsp;



## Transition: Deployment / transition documentation

**Type: deliverable**

This deliverable is intended to assist with the knowledge transfer to
the next team that will continue working on this project, whether they
will be adding new features or addressing routine maintenance tasks. At
this point, there are several possibilities for the project's next
phase:

-   The project continues next semester with the same team(s). This is
    typical in a program that consists of a two-semester capstone
    project sequence.

-   The project continues next semester with at least one new team. This
    could be the same scenario as above, but with an additional team (or
    several) from the next semester's first course in the capstone
    sequence, resulting in an overlap in some teams. There will be no
    such overlap in an academic program where the project is associated
    with a single course, and the project will continue with one or more
    new teams.

-   The project is completed and there are no teams actively involved in
    feature development. The project might still need routine
    maintenance and bug fixes.

This deliverable will need to detail all necessary steps needed to
deploy/install/configure the software developed for the project, along
with the development environment configuration. Additionally, this
deliverable should require that the code base be reasonably well
documented, and that the instructor (or another designated person) be
granted access to the team's code repository so that it may be properly
archived.

**Template:**

**Prerequisites:**

**Grading rubric:**



{{< footer >}}

